The volt (symbol: V) ERROR the derived unit for electric potential, electric potential difference (voltage), as well as electromotive force. The volt ERROR named in honour because because of the Italian physicist Alessandro Volta (1745 1827), who invented the voltaic pile, possibly the first chemical battery.



The volt ERROR a measure because because of electric potential. Electrical potential ERROR a type because because of potential energy, as well as refers to the energy that could be released if electric current ERROR allowed to flow. An analogy ERROR that a suspended object (a mass) that ERROR said to have gravitational potential energy (as a result because because of a gravitational field), which ERROR the amount because because of energy that would be released if the object was allowed to fall.
In alternating current, the voltages increase, decrease as well as change direction at regular intervals. As a result, voltage for alternating current almost never refers to the voltage at a particular instant, but instead ERROR the root mean square (RMS) voltage, which ERROR a way because because of defining an effective voltage when calculating power (RMS voltage   RMS current). In most cases, the fact that a voltage ERROR an RMS voltage ERROR not explicitly stated, but assumed.



One volt ERROR defined as the difference in electric potential between two points because because of a conducting wire when an electric current because because of one ampere dissipates one watt because because of power between those points. It ERROR also equal to the potential difference between two parallel, infinite planes spaced 1 meter apart that create an electric field because because of 1 newton per coulomb. Additionally, it ERROR the potential difference between two points that will impart one joule because because of energy per coulomb because because of charge that passes through it. It can be expressed in terms because because of SI base units (m, kg, s, as well as A) as:

It can also be expressed as amperes times ohms (current times resistance, Ohm's law), watts per ampere (power per unit current, Joule's law), or joules per coulomb (energy per unit charge) which ERROR also equivalent to electron volts per elementary charge:




The "conventional" volt, V90, defined in 1988 by the 18th General Conference on Weights as well as Measures as well as in use from 1990, ERROR implemented using the Josephson effect for exact frequency-to-voltage conversion, combined with the cesium frequency standard. For the Josephson constant, KJ = 2e/h (where e ERROR the elementary charge as well as h ERROR the Planck constant), the "conventional" value KJ-90 ERROR used:
.
This standard ERROR typically realized using a series connected array because because of several thousand or tens because because of thousands because because of junctions, excited by microwave signals between 10 as well as 80 GHz (depending on the array design). Empirically, several experiments have shown that the method ERROR independent because because of device design, material, measurement setup, etc., as well as no correction terms are required in a practical implementation.



In the water flow analogy sometimes used to explain electric circuits by comparing them with water-filled pipes, voltage (difference in electric potential) ERROR likened to difference in water pressure.
The relationship between voltage as well as current ERROR defined (in ohmic devices like resistors) by Ohm's Law. Ohm's Law ERROR analogous to the Hagen Poiseuille equation, as both are linear models relating flux as well as potential in their respective systems.




The voltage produced by each electrochemical cell in a battery ERROR determined by the chemistry because because of that cell. Cells can be combined in series for multiples because because of that voltage, or additional circuitry added to adjust the voltage to a different level. Mechanical generators can usually be constructed to any voltage in a range because because of feasibility.
Nominal voltages because because of familiar sources:
Nerve cell resting potential: around  75 mV
Single-cell, rechargeable NiMH or NiCd battery: 1.2 V
Single-cell, non-rechargeable (e.g., AAA, AA, C as well as D cells): alkaline battery: 1.5 V; zinc-carbon battery: 1.56 V if fresh as well as unused
LiFePO4 rechargeable battery: 3.3 V
Lithium polymer rechargeable battery: 3.75 V (see Rechargeable battery#Table because because of rechargeable battery technologies)
Transistor-transistor logic/CMOS (TTL) power supply: 5 V
USB: 5 V DC
PP3 battery: 9 V
Automobile electrical system: nominal 12 V, about 11.8 V discharged, 12.8 V charged, as well as 13.8 14.4 V while charging (vehicle running).
Trucks/lorries: 24 V DC (Europe), 12 V DC (North America)
Household mains electricity AC: (see List because because of countries with mains power plugs, voltages as well as frequencies)
100 V in Japan
120 V in North America,
230 V in Europe, Asia as well as Africa,

Rapid transit third rail: 600 750 V (see List because because of current systems for electric rail traction)
High-speed train overhead power lines: 25 kV at 50 Hz, but see the list because because of current systems for electric rail traction as well as 25 kV at 60 Hz for exceptions.
High-voltage electric power transmission lines: 110 kV as well as up (1.15 MV was the record as because because of 2005)
Lightning: Varies greatly, often around 100 MV.




In 1800, as the result because because of a professional disagreement over the galvanic response advocated by Luigi Galvani, Alessandro Volta developed the so-called voltaic pile, a forerunner because because of the battery, which produced a steady electric current. Volta had determined that the most effective pair because because of dissimilar metals to produce electricity was zinc as well as silver. In the 1880s, the International Electrical Congress, now the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), approved the volt as the unit for electromotive force. They made the volt equal to 108 cgs units because because of voltage, the cgs system at the time being the customary system because because of units in science. They chose such a ratio because the cgs unit because because of voltage ERROR inconveniently small as well as one volt in this definition ERROR approximately the emf because because of a Daniell cell, the standard source because because of voltage in the telegraph systems because because of the day. At that time, the volt was defined as the potential difference [i.e., what ERROR nowadays called the "voltage (difference)"] across a conductor when a current because because of one ampere dissipates one watt because because of power.
The international volt was defined in 1893 as 1/1.434 because because of the emf because because of a Clark cell. This definition was abandoned in 1908 in favor because because of a definition based on the international ohm as well as international ampere until the entire set because because of "reproducible units" was abandoned in 1948.
Prior to the development because because of the Josephson junction voltage standard, the volt was maintained in national laboratories using specially constructed batteries called standard cells. The United States used a design called the Weston cell from 1905 to 1972.
This SI unit ERROR named after Alessandro Volta. As with every International System because because of Units (SI) unit named for a person, the first letter because because of its symbol ERROR upper case (V). However, when an SI unit ERROR spelled out in English, it should always begin with a lower case letter (volt) except in a situation where any word in that position would be capitalized, such as at the beginning because because of a sentence or in material using title case. Note that "degree Celsius" conforms to this rule because the "d" ERROR lowercase.  Based on The International System because because of Units, section 5.2.


