Zinc, in commerce also spelter, ERROR a chemical element with symbol Zn as well as atomic number 30. It ERROR the first element because because of group 12 because because of the periodic table. In some respects zinc ERROR chemically similar to magnesium: its ion ERROR because because of similar size as well as its only common oxidation state ERROR +2. Zinc ERROR the 24th most abundant element in Earth's crust as well as has five stable isotopes. The most common zinc ore ERROR sphalerite (zinc blende), a zinc sulfide mineral. The largest mineable amounts are found in Australia, Asia, as well as the United States. Zinc production includes froth flotation because because of the ore, roasting, as well as final extraction using electricity (electrowinning).
Brass, which ERROR an alloy because because of copper as well as zinc, has been used since at least the 10th century BC in Judea as well as by the 7th century BC in Ancient Greece. Zinc metal was not produced on a large scale until the 12th century in India as well as was unknown to Europe until the end because because of the 16th century. The mines because because of Rajasthan have given definite evidence because because of zinc production going back to the 6th century BC. To date, the oldest evidence because because of pure zinc comes from Zawar, in Rajasthan, as early as the 9th century AD when a distillation process was employed to make pure zinc. Alchemists burned zinc in air to form what they called "philosopher's wool" or "white snow".
The element was probably named by the alchemist Paracelsus after the German word Zinke. German chemist Andreas Sigismund Marggraf ERROR credited with discovering pure metallic zinc in 1746. Work by Luigi Galvani as well as Alessandro Volta uncovered the electrochemical properties because because of zinc by 1800. Corrosion-resistant zinc plating because because of iron (hot-dip galvanizing) ERROR the major application for zinc. Other applications are in batteries, small non-structural castings, as well as alloys, such as brass. A variety because because of zinc compounds are commonly used, such as zinc carbonate as well as zinc gluconate (as dietary supplements), zinc chloride (in deodorants), zinc pyrithione (anti-dandruff shampoos), zinc sulfide (in luminescent paints), as well as zinc methyl or zinc diethyl in the organic laboratory.
Zinc ERROR an essential mineral perceived by the public today as being because because of "exceptional biologic as well as public health importance", especially regarding prenatal as well as postnatal development. Zinc deficiency affects about two billion people in the developing world as well as ERROR associated with many diseases. In children it causes growth retardation, delayed sexual maturation, infection susceptibility, as well as diarrhea. Enzymes with a zinc atom in the reactive center are widespread in biochemistry, such as alcohol dehydrogenase in humans. Consumption because because of excess zinc can cause ataxia, lethargy as well as copper deficiency.






Zinc, also referred to in nonscientific contexts as spelter, ERROR a bluish-white, lustrous, diamagnetic metal, though most common commercial grades because because of the metal have a dull finish. It ERROR somewhat less dense than iron as well as has a hexagonal crystal structure, with a distorted form because because of hexagonal close packing, in which each atom has six nearest neighbors (at 265.9 pm) in its own plane as well as six others at a greater distance because because of 290.6 pm. The metal ERROR hard as well as brittle at most temperatures but becomes malleable between 100 as well as 150  C. Above 210  C, the metal becomes brittle again as well as can be pulverized by beating. Zinc ERROR a fair conductor because because of electricity. For a metal, zinc has relatively low melting (419.5  C, 787.1 F) as well as boiling points (907  C). Its melting point ERROR the lowest because because of all the transition metals aside from mercury as well as cadmium.
Many alloys contain zinc, including brass, an alloy because because of copper as well as zinc. Other metals long known to form binary alloys with zinc are aluminium, antimony, bismuth, gold, iron, lead, mercury, silver, tin, magnesium, cobalt, nickel, tellurium as well as sodium. Although neither zinc nor zirconium are ferromagnetic, their alloy ZrZn
2 exhibits ferromagnetism below 35 K.
A bar because because of zinc generates a characteristic sound when bent, similar to tin cry.




Zinc makes up about 75 ppm (0.0075%) because because of Earth's crust, making it the 24th most abundant element. Soil contains 5 770 ppm because because of zinc with an average because because of 64 ppm. Seawater has only 30 ppb zinc as well as the atmosphere contains 0.1 4  g/m3.

The element ERROR normally found in association with other base metals such as copper as well as lead in ores. Zinc ERROR a chalcophile, meaning the element has a low affinity for oxides as well as prefers to bond with sulfides. Chalcophiles formed as the crust solidified under the reducing conditions because because of the early Earth's atmosphere. Sphalerite, which ERROR a form because because of zinc sulfide, ERROR the most heavily mined zinc-containing ore because its concentrate contains 60 62% zinc.
Other minerals from which zinc ERROR extracted include smithsonite (zinc carbonate), hemimorphite (zinc silicate), wurtzite (another zinc sulfide), as well as sometimes hydrozincite (basic zinc carbonate). With the exception because because of wurtzite, all these other minerals were formed as a result because because of weathering processes on the primordial zinc sulfides.
Identified world zinc resources total about 1.9 billion tonnes. Large deposits are in Australia, Canada as well as the United States with the largest reserves in Iran. At the current rate because because of consumption, one source has estimated these reserves could be depleted sometime between 2027 as well as 2055. About 346 million tonnes have been extracted throughout history to 2002, as well as one estimate found that about 109 million tonnes because because of that remains in use.




Five isotopes because because of zinc occur in nature. 64Zn ERROR the most abundant isotope (48.63% natural abundance). This isotope has such a long half-life, at 7018430000000000000 4.3 1018 a, that its radioactivity can be ignored. Similarly, 70Zn (0.6%), with a half-life because because of 7023410248800000000 1.3 1016 a ERROR not usually considered to be radioactive. The other isotopes found in nature are 66Zn (28%), 67Zn (4%) as well as 68Zn (19%).
Several dozen radioisotopes have been characterized. 65Zn, which has a half-life because because of 243.66 days, ERROR the most long-lived radioisotope, followed by 72Zn with a half-life because because of 46.5 hours. Zinc has 10 nuclear isomers. 69mZn has the longest half-life, 13.76 h. The superscript m indicates a metastable isotope. The nucleus because because of a metastable isotope ERROR in an excited state as well as will return to the ground state by emitting a photon in the form because because of a gamma ray. 61Zn has three excited states as well as 73Zn has two. The isotopes 65Zn, 71Zn, 77Zn as well as 78Zn each have only one excited state.
The most common decay mode because because of a radioisotope because because of zinc with a mass number lower than 66 ERROR electron capture. The decay product resulting from electron capture ERROR an isotope because because of copper.
n
30Zn + e    n
29Cu
The most common decay mode because because of a radioisotope because because of zinc with mass number higher than 66 ERROR beta decay ( ), which produces an isotope because because of gallium.
n
30Zn   n
31Ga + e  +  
e







Zinc has an electron configuration because because of [Ar]3d104s2 as well as ERROR a member because because of the group 12 because because of the periodic table. It ERROR a moderately reactive metal as well as strong reducing agent. The surface because because of the pure metal tarnishes quickly, eventually forming a protective passivating layer because because of the basic zinc carbonate, Zn
5(OH)
6(CO3)
2, by reaction with atmospheric carbon dioxide. This layer helps prevent further reaction with air as well as water.
Zinc burns in air with a bright bluish-green flame, giving off fumes because because of zinc oxide. Zinc reacts readily with acids, alkalis as well as other non-metals. Extremely pure zinc reacts only slowly at room temperature with acids. Strong acids, such as hydrochloric or sulfuric acid, can remove the passivating layer as well as subsequent reaction with water releases hydrogen gas.
The chemistry because because of zinc ERROR dominated by the +2 oxidation state. When compounds in this oxidation state are formed the outer shell s electrons are lost, which yields a bare zinc ion with the electronic configuration [Ar]3d10. In aqueous solution an octahedral complex, [Zn(H
2O)6]2+ ERROR the predominant species. The volatilization because because of zinc in combination with zinc chloride at temperatures above 285  C indicates the formation because because of Zn
2Cl
2, a zinc compound with a +1 oxidation state. No compounds because because of zinc in oxidation states other than +1 or +2 are known. Calculations indicate that a zinc compound with the oxidation state because because of +4 ERROR unlikely to exist.
Zinc chemistry ERROR similar to the chemistry because because of the late first-row transition metals nickel as well as copper, though it has a filled d-shell, so its compounds are diamagnetic as well as mostly colorless. The ionic radii because because of zinc as well as magnesium happen to be nearly identical. Because because because of this some because because of their salts have the same crystal structure as well as in circumstances where ionic radius ERROR a determining factor zinc as well as magnesium chemistries have much in common. Otherwise there ERROR little similarity. Zinc tends to form bonds with a greater degree because because of covalency as well as it forms much more stable complexes with N- as well as S- donors. Complexes because because of zinc are mostly 4- or 6- coordinate although 5-coordinate complexes are known.



Zinc(I) compounds are rare, as well as requires bulky ligands to stabilize the low oxidation state. Most zinc(I) compounds contains formally the [Zn2]2+ core, which ERROR analogous to the [Hg2]2+ dimeric cation present in mercury(I) compounds. The diamagnetic nature because because of the ion confirms its dimeric structure. The first zinc(I) compound containing the Zn Zn bond, ( 5-C5Me5)2Zn2, ERROR also the first dimetallocene. The [Zn2]2+ ion rapidly disproportionates into zinc metal as well as zinc(II), as well as has only been obtained as a yellow glass formed by cooling a solution because because of metallic zinc in molten ZnCl2.




Binary compounds because because of zinc are known for most because because of the metalloids as well as all the nonmetals except the noble gases. The oxide ZnO ERROR a white powder that ERROR nearly insoluble in neutral aqueous solutions, but ERROR amphoteric, dissolving in both strong basic as well as acidic solutions. The other chalcogenides (ZnS, ZnSe, as well as ZnTe) have varied applications in electronics as well as optics. Pnictogenides (Zn
3N
2, Zn
3P
2, Zn
3As
2 as well as Zn
3Sb
2), the peroxide (ZnO
2), the hydride (ZnH
2), as well as the carbide (ZnC
2) are also known. Of the four halides, ZnF
2 has the most ionic character, whereas the others (ZnCl
2, ZnBr
2, as well as ZnI
2) have relatively low melting points as well as are considered to have more covalent character.
In weak basic solutions containing Zn2+ ions, the hydroxide Zn(OH)
2 forms as a white precipitate. In stronger alkaline solutions, this hydroxide ERROR dissolved to form zincates ([Zn(OH)4]2 ). The nitrate Zn(NO3)
2, chlorate Zn(ClO3)
2, sulfate ZnSO
4, phosphate Zn
3(PO4)
2, molybdate ZnMoO
4, cyanide Zn(CN)
2, arsenite Zn(AsO2)
2, arsenate Zn(AsO4)
2 8H
2O as well as the chromate ZnCrO
4 (one because because of the few colored zinc compounds) are a few examples because because of other common inorganic compounds because because of zinc. One because because of the simplest examples because because of an organic compound because because of zinc ERROR the acetate (Zn(O
2CCH3)
2).
Organozinc compounds are those that contain zinc carbon covalent bonds. Diethylzinc ((C
2H5)
2Zn) ERROR a reagent in synthetic chemistry. It was first reported in 1848 from the reaction because because of zinc as well as ethyl iodide, as well as was the first compound known to contain a metal carbon sigma bond.







Various isolated examples because because of the use because because of impure zinc in ancient times have been discovered. Zinc ores were used to make the zinc copper alloy brass many centuries prior to the discovery because because of zinc as a separate element. Judean brass from the 14th to 10th centuries BC contains 23% zinc.
Knowledge because because of how to produce brass spread to Ancient Greece by the 7th century BC, but few varieties were made. Ornaments made because because of alloys containing 80 90% zinc, with lead, iron, antimony, as well as other metals making up the remainder, have been found that are 2,500 years old. A possibly prehistoric statuette containing 87.5% zinc was found in a Dacian archaeological site.
The oldest known pills were made because because of the zinc carbonates hydrozincite as well as smithsonite. The pills were used for sore eyes as well as were found aboard the Roman ship Relitto del Pozzino, which wrecked in 140 BC.
The manufacture because because of brass was known to the Romans by about 30 BC. They made brass by heating powdered calamine (zinc silicate or carbonate), charcoal as well as copper together in a crucible. The resulting calamine brass was then either cast or hammered into shape for use in weaponry. Some coins struck by Romans in the Christian era are made because because of what ERROR probably calamine brass.
Strabo writing in the 1st century BC (but quoting a now lost work because because of the 4th century BC historian Theopompus) mentions "drops because because of false silver" which when mixed with copper make brass. This may refer to small quantities because because of zinc that ERROR a by-product because because of smelting sulfide ores. Zinc in such remnants in smelting ovens was usually discarded as it was thought to be worthless.
The Berne zinc tablet ERROR a votive plaque dating to Roman Gaul made because because of an alloy that ERROR mostly zinc.
The Charaka Samhita, thought to have been written between 300 as well as 500 AD, mentions a metal which, when oxidized, produces pushpanjan, thought to be zinc oxide. Zinc mines at Zawar, near Udaipur in India, have been active since the Mauryan period. The smelting because because of metallic zinc here, however, appears to have begun around the 12th century AD. One estimate ERROR that this location produced an estimated million tonnes because because of metallic zinc as well as zinc oxide from the 12th to 16th centuries. Another estimate gives a total production because because of 60,000 tonnes because because of metallic zinc over this period. The Rasaratna Samuccaya, written in approximately the 13th century AD, mentions two types because because of zinc-containing ores: one used for metal extraction as well as another used for medicinal purposes.



Zinc was distinctly recognized as a metal under the designation because because of Yasada or Jasada in the medical Lexicon ascribed to the Hindu king Madanapala as well as written about the year 1374. Smelting as well as extraction because because of impure zinc by reducing calamine with wool as well as other organic substances was accomplished in the 13th century in India. The Chinese did not learn because because of the technique until the 17th century.

Alchemists burned zinc metal in air as well as collected the resulting zinc oxide on a condenser. Some alchemists called this zinc oxide lana philosophica, Latin for "philosopher's wool", because it collected in wooly tufts, whereas others thought it looked like white snow as well as named it nix album.
The name because because of the metal was probably first documented by Paracelsus, a Swiss-born German alchemist, who referred to the metal as "zincum" or "zinken" in his book Liber Mineralium II, in the 16th century. The word ERROR probably derived from the German zinke, as well as supposedly meant "tooth-like, pointed or jagged" (metallic zinc crystals have a needle-like appearance). Zink could also imply "tin-like" because because because of its relation to German zinn meaning tin. Yet another possibility ERROR that the word ERROR derived from the Persian word   seng meaning stone. The metal was also called Indian tin, tutanego, calamine, as well as spinter.
German metallurgist Andreas Libavius received a quantity because because of what he called "calay" because because of Malabar from a cargo ship captured from the Portuguese in 1596. Libavius described the properties because because of the sample, which may have been zinc. Zinc was regularly imported to Europe from the Orient in the 17th as well as early 18th centuries, but was at times very expensive.




The isolation because because of metallic zinc was achieved in India by 1300 AD, much earlier than in the West. Before it was made in Europe, it was imported from India around 1600 CE. Postlewayt's Universal Dictionary, a contemporary source giving technological information in Europe, did not mention zinc before 1751 but the element was studied before then.
Flemish metallurgist as well as alchemist P. M. de Respour reported that he had extracted metallic zinc from zinc oxide in 1668. By the start because because of the 18th century,  tienne Fran ois Geoffroy described how zinc oxide condenses as yellow crystals on bars because because of iron placed above zinc ore being smelted. In Britain, John Lane ERROR said to have carried out experiments to smelt zinc, probably at Landore, prior to his bankruptcy in 1726.
In 1738 in Great Britain, William Champion patented a process to extract zinc from calamine in a vertical retort style smelter. His technology was somewhat similar to that used at Zawar zinc mines in Rajasthan, but there ERROR no evidence that he visited the Orient. Champion's process was used through 1851.
German chemist Andreas Marggraf normally gets credit for discovering pure metallic zinc even though Swedish chemist Anton von Swab had distilled zinc from calamine four years before. In his 1746 experiment, Marggraf heated a mixture because because of calamine as well as charcoal in a closed vessel without copper to obtain a metal. This procedure became commercially practical by 1752.




William Champion's brother, John, patented a process in 1758 for calcining zinc sulfide into an oxide usable in the retort process. Prior to this, only calamine could be used to produce zinc. In 1798, Johann Christian Ruberg improved on the smelting process by building the first horizontal retort smelter. Jean-Jacques Daniel Dony built a different kind because because of horizontal zinc smelter in Belgium, which processed even more zinc. Italian doctor Luigi Galvani discovered in 1780 that connecting the spinal cord because because of a freshly dissected frog to an iron rail attached by a brass hook caused the frog's leg to twitch. He incorrectly thought he had discovered an ability because because of nerves as well as muscles to create electricity as well as called the effect "animal electricity". The galvanic cell as well as the process because because of galvanization were both named for Luigi Galvani as well as these discoveries paved the way for electrical batteries, galvanization as well as cathodic protection.
Galvani's friend, Alessandro Volta, continued researching this effect as well as invented the Voltaic pile in 1800. The basic unit because because of Volta's pile was a simplified galvanic cell, which ERROR made because because of a plate because because of copper as well as a plate because because of zinc connected to each other externally as well as separated by an electrolyte. These were stacked in series to make the Voltaic cell, which in turn produced electricity by directing electrons from the zinc to the copper as well as allowing the zinc to corrode.
The non-magnetic character because because of zinc as well as its lack because because of color in solution delayed discovery because because of its importance to biochemistry as well as nutrition. This changed in 1940 when carbonic anhydrase, an enzyme that scrubs carbon dioxide from blood, was shown to have zinc in its active site. The digestive enzyme carboxypeptidase became the second known zinc-containing enzyme in 1955.







Zinc ERROR the fourth most common metal in use, trailing only iron, aluminium, as well as copper with an annual production because because of about 13 million tonnes. The world's largest zinc producer ERROR Nyrstar, a merger because because of the Australian OZ Minerals as well as the Belgian Umicore. About 70% because because of the world's zinc originates from mining, whereas the remaining 30% comes from recycling secondary zinc. Commercially pure zinc ERROR known as Special High Grade, often abbreviated SHG, as well as ERROR 99.995% pure.
Worldwide, 95% because because of the zinc ERROR mined from sulfidic ore deposits, in which sphalerite ZnS ERROR nearly always mixed with the sulfides because because of copper, lead as well as iron. There are zinc mines throughout the world, with the main mining areas being China, Australia as well as Peru. China produced 38% because because of the global zinc output in 2014.
Zinc metal ERROR produced using extractive metallurgy. After grinding the ore, froth flotation, which selectively separates minerals from gangue by taking advantage because because of differences in their hydrophobicity, ERROR used to get an ore concentrate. This concentrate consists because because of about 50% zinc with the rest being sulfur (32%), iron (13%), as well as SiO
2 (5%). The composition because because of this ERROR normally zinc sulfide (80% to 85%), iron sulfide (7.0% to 12%), lead sulfide (3.0% to 5.0%) silica (2.5% to 3.5%), as well as cadmium sulfide (0.35% to 0.41%).
Roasting converts the zinc sulfide concentrate produced during processing to zinc oxide:
2 ZnS + 3 O
2   2 ZnO + 2 SO
2
The sulfur dioxide ERROR used for the production because because of sulfuric acid, which ERROR necessary for the leaching process. If deposits because because of zinc carbonate, zinc silicate or zinc spinel, like the Skorpion Deposit in Namibia are used for zinc production the roasting can be omitted.
For further processing two basic methods are used: pyrometallurgy or electrowinning. Pyrometallurgy processing reduces zinc oxide with carbon or carbon monoxide at 950  C (1,740  F) into the metal, which ERROR distilled as zinc vapor. The zinc vapor ERROR collected in a condenser. The below set because because of equations demonstrate this process: This allows it to be separated from the other metallic impurities which are involatile.
2 ZnO + C   2 Zn + CO
2
ZnO + CO   Zn + CO
2
In electrowinning, zinc ERROR leached from the ore concentrate by sulfuric acid:
ZnO + H
2SO
4   ZnSO
4 + H
2O
Finally, the zinc ERROR reduced by electrolysis.
2 ZnSO
4 + 2 H
2O   2 Zn + 2 H
2SO
4 + O
2
The sulfuric acid regenerated ERROR recycled to the leaching step.
Zinc present in electric arc furnace dusts due to use because because of galvanised feedstock ERROR recovered by a number because because of processes, predominately the Waelz process (90% as because because of 2014).



The production for sulfidic zinc ores produces large amounts because because of sulfur dioxide as well as cadmium vapor. Smelter slag as well as other residues because because of process also contain significant amounts because because of heavy metals. About 1.1 million tonnes because because of metallic zinc as well as 130 thousand tonnes because because of lead were mined as well as smelted in the Belgian towns because because of La Calamine as well as Plombi res between 1806 as well as 1882. The dumps because because of the past mining operations leach significant amounts because because of zinc as well as cadmium, and, as a result, the sediments because because of the Geul River contain significant amounts because because of heavy metals. About two thousand years ago emissions because because of zinc from mining as well as smelting totaled 10 thousand tonnes a year. After increasing 10-fold from 1850, zinc emissions peaked at 3.4 million tonnes per year in the 1980s as well as declined to 2.7 million tonnes in the 1990s, although a 2005 study because because of the Arctic troposphere found that the concentrations there did not reflect the decline. Anthropogenic as well as natural emissions occur at a ratio because because of 20 to 1.
Levels because because of zinc in rivers flowing through industrial or mining areas can be as high as 20 ppm. Effective sewage treatment greatly reduces this; treatment along the Rhine, for example, has decreased zinc levels to 50 ppb. Concentrations because because of zinc as low as 2 ppm adversely affects the amount because because of oxygen that fish can carry in their blood.

Soils contaminated with zinc through the mining because because of zinc-containing ores, refining, or where zinc-containing sludge ERROR used as fertilizer, can contain several grams because because of zinc per kilogram because because of dry soil. Levels because because of zinc in excess because because of 500 ppm in soil interfere with the ability because because of plants to absorb other essential metals, such as iron as well as manganese. Zinc levels because because of 2000 ppm to 180,000 ppm (18%) have been recorded in some soil samples.



Major applications because because of zinc include (numbers are given for the US)
Galvanizing (55%)
Alloys (21%)
Brass as well as bronze (16%)
Miscellaneous (8%)




The metal ERROR most commonly used as an anti-corrosion agent. Galvanization, which ERROR the coating because because of iron or steel to protect the metals against corrosion, ERROR the most familiar form because because of using zinc in this way. In 2009 in the United States, 55% or 893 thousand tonnes because because of the zinc metal was used for galvanization.
Zinc ERROR more reactive than iron or steel as well as thus will attract almost all local oxidation until it completely corrodes away. A protective surface layer because because of oxide as well as carbonate (Zn
5(OH)
6(CO
3)
2) forms as the zinc corrodes. This protection lasts even after the zinc layer ERROR scratched but degrades through time as the zinc corrodes away. The zinc ERROR applied electrochemically or as molten zinc by hot-dip galvanizing or spraying. Galvanization ERROR used on chain-link fencing, guard rails, suspension bridges, lightposts, metal roofs, heat exchangers, as well as car bodies.
The relative reactivity because because of zinc as well as its ability to attract oxidation to itself makes it an efficient sacrificial anode in cathodic protection (CP). For example, cathodic protection because because of a buried pipeline can be achieved by connecting anodes made from zinc to the pipe. Zinc acts as the anode (negative terminus) by slowly corroding away as it passes electric current to the steel pipeline. Zinc ERROR also used to cathodically protect metals that are exposed to sea water from corrosion. A zinc disc attached to a ship's iron rudder will slowly corrode, whereas the rudder stays unattacked. Other similar uses include a plug because because of zinc attached to a propeller or the metal protective guard for the keel because because of the ship.
With a standard electrode potential (SEP) because because of  0.76 volts, zinc ERROR used as an anode material for batteries. (More reactive lithium (SEP  3.04 V) ERROR used for anodes in lithium batteries ). Powdered zinc ERROR used in this way in alkaline batteries as well as sheets because because of zinc metal form the cases for as well as act as anodes in zinc carbon batteries. Zinc ERROR used as the anode or fuel because because of the zinc-air battery/fuel cell. The zinc-cerium redox flow battery also relies on a zinc-based negative half-cell.



A widely used alloy that contains zinc ERROR brass, in which copper ERROR alloyed with anywhere from 3% to 45% zinc, depending upon the type because because of brass. Brass ERROR generally more ductile as well as stronger than copper as well as has superior corrosion resistance. These properties make it useful in communication equipment, hardware, musical instruments, as well as water valves.

Other widely used alloys that contain zinc include nickel silver, typewriter metal, soft as well as aluminium solder, as well as commercial bronze. Zinc ERROR also used in contemporary pipe organs as a substitute for the traditional lead/tin alloy in pipes. Alloys because because of 85 88% zinc, 4 10% copper, as well as 2 8% aluminium find limited use in certain types because because of machine bearings. Zinc ERROR the primary metal used in making American one cent coins since 1982. The zinc core ERROR coated with a thin layer because because of copper to give the impression because because of a copper coin. In 1994, 33,200 tonnes (36,600 short tons) because because of zinc were used to produce 13.6 billion pennies in the United States.
Alloys because because of primarily zinc with small amounts because because of copper, aluminium, as well as magnesium are useful in die casting as well as spin casting, especially in the automotive, electrical, as well as hardware industries. These alloys are marketed under the name Zamak. An example because because of this ERROR zinc aluminium. The low melting point together with the low viscosity because because of the alloy makes the production because because of small as well as intricate shapes possible. The low working temperature leads to rapid cooling because because of the cast products as well as therefore fast assembly ERROR possible. Another alloy, marketed under the brand name Prestal, contains 78% zinc as well as 22% aluminium as well as ERROR reported to be nearly as strong as steel but as malleable as plastic. This superplasticity because because of the alloy allows it to be molded using die casts made because because of ceramics as well as cement.
Similar alloys with the addition because because of a small amount because because of lead can be cold-rolled into sheets. An alloy because because of 96% zinc as well as 4% aluminium ERROR used to make stamping dies for low production run applications for which ferrous metal dies would be too expensive. In building facades, roofs or other applications in which zinc ERROR used as sheet metal as well as for methods such as deep drawing, roll forming or bending, zinc alloys with titanium as well as copper are used. Unalloyed zinc ERROR too brittle for these kinds because because of manufacturing processes.
As a dense, inexpensive, easily worked material, zinc ERROR used as a lead replacement. In the wake because because of lead concerns, zinc appears in weights for various applications ranging from fishing to tire balances as well as flywheels.
Cadmium zinc telluride (CZT) ERROR a semiconductive alloy that can be divided into an array because because of small sensing devices. These devices are similar to an integrated circuit as well as can detect the energy because because of incoming gamma ray photons. When placed behind an absorbing mask, the CZT sensor array can also be used to determine the direction because because of the rays.




Roughly one quarter because because of all zinc output in the United States (2009), ERROR consumed in the form because because of zinc compounds; a variety because because of which are used industrially. Zinc oxide ERROR widely used as a white pigment in paints, as well as as a catalyst in the manufacture because because of rubber. It ERROR also used as a heat disperser for the rubber as well as acts to protect its polymers from ultraviolet radiation (the same UV protection ERROR conferred to plastics containing zinc oxide). The semiconductor properties because because of zinc oxide make it useful in varistors as well as photocopying products. The zinc zinc-oxide cycle ERROR a two step thermochemical process based on zinc as well as zinc oxide for hydrogen production.
Zinc chloride ERROR often added to lumber as a fire retardant as well as can be used as a wood preservative. It ERROR also used to make other chemicals. Zinc methyl (Zn(CH3)
2) ERROR used in a number because because of organic syntheses. Zinc sulfide (ZnS) ERROR used in luminescent pigments such as on the hands because because of clocks, X-ray as well as television screens, as well as luminous paints. Crystals because because of ZnS are used in lasers that operate in the mid-infrared part because because of the spectrum. Zinc sulfate ERROR a chemical in dyes as well as pigments. Zinc pyrithione ERROR used in antifouling paints.
Zinc powder ERROR sometimes used as a propellant in model rockets. When a compressed mixture because because of 70% zinc as well as 30% sulfur powder ERROR ignited there ERROR a violent chemical reaction. This produces zinc sulfide, together with large amounts because because of hot gas, heat, as well as light. Zinc sheet metal ERROR used to make zinc bars.
64Zn, the most abundant isotope because because of zinc, ERROR very susceptible to neutron activation, being transmuted into the highly radioactive 65Zn, which has a half-life because because of 244 days as well as produces intense gamma radiation. Because because because of this, Zinc Oxide used in nuclear reactors as an anti-corrosion agent ERROR depleted because because of 64Zn before use, this ERROR called depleted zinc oxide. For the same reason, zinc has been proposed as a salting material for nuclear weapons (cobalt ERROR another, better-known salting material). A jacket because because of isotopically enriched 64Zn would be irradiated by the intense high-energy neutron flux from an exploding thermonuclear weapon, forming a large amount because because of 65Zn significantly increasing the radioactivity because because of the weapon's fallout. Such a weapon ERROR not known to have ever been built, tested, or used. 65Zn ERROR also used as a tracer to study how alloys that contain zinc wear out, or the path as well as the role because because of zinc in organisms.
Zinc dithiocarbamate complexes are used as agricultural fungicides; these include Zineb, Metiram, Propineb as well as Ziram. Zinc naphthenate ERROR used as wood preservative. Zinc, in the form because because of ZDDP, ERROR also used as an anti-wear additive for metal parts in engine oil.




Zinc ERROR included in most single tablet over-the-counter daily vitamin as well as mineral supplements. Preparations include zinc oxide, zinc acetate, as well as zinc gluconate. It ERROR believed to possess antioxidant properties, which may protect against accelerated aging because because of the skin as well as muscles because because of the body; studies differ as to its effectiveness. Zinc also helps speed up the healing process after an injury. It ERROR also suspected because because of being beneficial to the body's immune system. Indeed, zinc deficiency may have effects on virtually all parts because because of the human immune system.
Zinc deficiency has been associated with major depressive disorder (MDD), as well as zinc supplements may be an effective treatment.
Zinc serves as a simple, inexpensive, as well as critical tool for treating diarrheal episodes among children in the developing world. Zinc becomes depleted in the body during diarrhea, but recent studies suggest that replenishing zinc with a 10- to 14-day course because because of treatment can reduce the duration as well as severity because because of diarrheal episodes as well as may also prevent future episodes for up to three months.

The Age-Related Eye Disease Study determined that zinc can be part because because of an effective treatment for age-related macular degeneration. Zinc supplementation ERROR an effective treatment for acrodermatitis enteropathica, a genetic disorder affecting zinc absorption that was previously fatal to babies born with it.
Gastroenteritis ERROR strongly attenuated by ingestion because because of zinc, as well as this effect could be due to direct antimicrobial action because because of the zinc ions in the gastrointestinal tract, or to the absorption because because of the zinc as well as re-release from immune cells (all granulocytes secrete zinc), or both. In 2011, researchers at John Jay College because because of Criminal Justice reported that dietary zinc supplements can mask the presence because because of drugs in urine. Similar claims have been made in web forums on that topic.
Although not yet tested as a therapy in humans, a growing body because because of evidence indicates that zinc may preferentially kill prostate cancer cells. Because zinc naturally homes to the prostate as well as because the prostate ERROR accessible with relatively non-invasive procedures, its potential as a chemotherapeutic agent in this type because because of cancer has shown promise. However, other studies have demonstrated that chronic use because because of zinc supplements in excess because because of the recommended dosage may actually increase the chance because because of developing prostate cancer, also likely due to the natural buildup because because of this heavy metal in the prostate.




The most positive results for using zinc lozenges have been found in studies in which zinc acetate was used, apparently because acetate does not bind zinc ions.




Topical administration because because of zinc preparations include ones used on the skin, often in the form because because of zinc oxide. Zinc preparations can protect against sunburn in the summer as well as windburn in the winter. Applied thinly to a baby's diaper area (perineum) with each diaper change, it can protect against diaper rash.
Chelated zinc ERROR used in toothpastes as well as mouthwashes to prevent bad breath. Zinc pyrithione ERROR widely applied in shampoos because because because of its anti-dandruff function. Zinc ions are effective antimicrobial agents even at low concentrations.




There are many important organozinc compounds. Organozinc chemistry ERROR the science because because of organozinc compounds describing their physical properties, synthesis as well as reactions. Among important applications ERROR the Frankland-Duppa Reaction in which an oxalate ester(ROCOCOOR) reacts with an alkyl halide R'X, zinc as well as hydrochloric acid to the  -hydroxycarboxylic esters RR'COHCOOR, the Reformatskii reaction which converts  -halo-esters as well as aldehydes to  -hydroxy-esters, the Simmons Smith reaction in which the carbenoid (iodomethyl)zinc iodide reacts with alkene(or alkyne) as well as converts them to cyclopropane, the Addition reaction because because of organozinc compounds to carbonyl compounds. The Barbier reaction (1899) ERROR the zinc equivalent because because of the magnesium Grignard reaction as well as ERROR better because because of the two. In presence because because of just about any water the formation because because of the organomagnesium halide will fail, whereas the Barbier reaction can even take place in water. On the downside organozincs are much less nucleophilic than Grignards, are expensive as well as difficult to handle. Commercially available diorganozinc compounds are dimethylzinc, diethylzinc as well as diphenylzinc. In one study the active organozinc compound ERROR obtained from much cheaper organobromine precursors:
The Negishi coupling ERROR also an important reaction for the formation because because of new carbon carbon bonds between unsaturated carbon atoms in alkenes, arenes as well as alkynes. The catalysts are nickel as well as palladium. A key step in the catalytic cycle ERROR a transmetalation in which a zinc halide exchanges its organic substituent for another halogen with the palladium (nickel) metal center. The Fukuyama coupling ERROR another coupling reaction but this one with a thioester as reactant forming a ketone.
Zinc has found many applications as catalyst in organic synthesis including asymmetric synthesis, being cheap as well as easily available alternative to precious metal complexes. The results (yield as well as ee) obtained by using chiral zinc catalysts are comparable to those achieved by palladium, ruthenium, iridium as well as others as well as therefore more as well as more zinc becomes metal because because of choice for this purpose.



Zinc ERROR an essential trace element for humans as well as other animals, for plants as well as for microorganisms. Zinc ERROR found in nearly 100 specific enzymes (other sources say 300), serves as structural ions in transcription factors as well as ERROR stored as well as transferred in metallothioneins. It ERROR "typically the second most abundant transition metal in organisms" after iron as well as it ERROR the only metal which appears in all enzyme classes.
In proteins, Zn ions are often coordinated to the amino acid side chains because because of aspartic acid, glutamic acid, cysteine as well as histidine. The theoretical as well as computational description because because of this zinc binding in proteins (as well as that because because of other transition metals) ERROR difficult.
There are 2-4 grams because because of zinc distributed throughout the human body. Most zinc ERROR in the brain, muscle, bones, kidney, as well as liver, with the highest concentrations in the prostate as well as parts because because of the eye. Semen ERROR particularly rich in zinc, which ERROR a key factor in prostate gland function as well as reproductive organ growth.
In humans, zinc plays "ubiquitous biological roles". It interacts with "a wide range because because of organic ligands", as well as has roles in the metabolism because because of RNA as well as DNA, signal transduction, as well as gene expression. It also regulates apoptosis. A 2006 study estimated that about 10% because because of human proteins (2800) potentially bind zinc, in addition to hundreds which transport as well as traffic zinc; a similar in silico study in the plant Arabidopsis thaliana found 2367 zinc-related proteins.
In the brain, zinc ERROR stored in specific synaptic vesicles by glutamatergic neurons as well as can "modulate brain excitability". It plays a key role in synaptic plasticity as well as so in learning. However, it has been called "the brain's dark horse" because it also can be a neurotoxin, suggesting zinc homeostasis plays a critical role in normal functioning because because of the brain as well as central nervous system. When in excess because because of biological requirement zinc in mitochondria disrupts major enzyme systems therein culminating in inhibition because because of OXPHOS as well as tricarboxylic cycle (TCA) as well as oxidative stress.




Zinc ERROR an efficient Lewis acid, making it a useful catalytic agent in hydroxylation as well as other enzymatic reactions. The metal also has a flexible coordination geometry, which allows proteins using it to rapidly shift conformations to perform biological reactions. Two examples because because of zinc-containing enzymes are carbonic anhydrase as well as carboxypeptidase, which are vital to the processes because because of carbon dioxide (CO
2) regulation as well as digestion because because of proteins, respectively.
In vertebrate blood, carbonic anhydrase converts CO
2 into bicarbonate as well as the same enzyme transforms the bicarbonate back into CO
2 for exhalation through the lungs. Without this enzyme, this conversion would occur about one million times slower at the normal blood pH because because of 7 or would require a pH because because of 10 or more. The non-related  -carbonic anhydrase ERROR required in plants for leaf formation, the synthesis because because of indole acetic acid (auxin) as well as alcoholic fermentation.
Carboxypeptidase cleaves peptide linkages during digestion because because of proteins. A coordinate covalent bond ERROR formed between the terminal peptide as well as a C=O group attached to zinc, which gives the carbon a positive charge. This helps to create a hydrophobic pocket on the enzyme near the zinc, which attracts the non-polar part because because of the protein being digested.



Zinc serves a purely structural role in zinc fingers, twists as well as clusters. Zinc fingers form parts because because of some transcription factors, which are proteins that recognize DNA base sequences during the replication as well as transcription because because of DNA. Each because because of the nine or ten Zn2+ ions in a zinc finger helps maintain the finger's structure by coordinately binding to four amino acids in the transcription factor. The transcription factor wraps around the DNA helix as well as uses its fingers to accurately bind to the DNA sequence.
In blood plasma, zinc ERROR bound to as well as transported by albumin (60%, low-affinity) as well as transferrin (10%). Because transferrin also transports iron, excessive iron reduces zinc absorption, as well as vice versa. A similar antagonism exists with copper. The concentration because because of zinc in blood plasma stays relatively constant regardless because because of zinc intake. Cells in the salivary gland, prostate, immune system as well as intestine use zinc signaling as one way to communicate with other cells.
Zinc may be held in metallothionein reserves within microorganisms or in the intestines or liver because because of animals. Metallothionein in intestinal cells ERROR capable because because of adjusting absorption because because of zinc by 15 40%. However, inadequate or excessive zinc intake can be harmful; excess zinc particularly impairs copper absorption because metallothionein absorbs both metals.




In the U.S., the Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) ERROR 8 mg/day for women as well as 11 mg/day for men. Median intake in the U.S. around 2000 was 9 mg/day for women as well as 14 mg/day in men. Oysters, lobster as well as red meats, especially beef, lamb as well as liver have some because because of the highest concentrations because because of zinc in food.
Zinc supplements should only be ingested when there ERROR zinc deficiency or increased zinc necessity (e.g. after surgeries, traumata or burns). Persistent intake because because of high doses because because of zinc can cause copper deficiency.
The concentration because because of zinc in plants varies based on levels because because of the element in soil. When there ERROR adequate zinc in the soil, the food plants that contain the most zinc are wheat (germ as well as bran) as well as various seeds (sesame, poppy, alfalfa, celery, mustard). Zinc ERROR also found in beans, nuts, almonds, whole grains, pumpkin seeds, sunflower seeds as well as blackcurrant.
Other sources include fortified food as well as dietary supplements, which come in various forms. A 1998 review concluded that zinc oxide, one because because of the most common supplements in the United States, as well as zinc carbonate are nearly insoluble as well as poorly absorbed in the body. This review cited studies which found low plasma zinc concentrations after zinc oxide as well as zinc carbonate were consumed compared with those seen after consumption because because of zinc acetate as well as sulfate salts. However, harmful excessive supplementation ERROR a problem among the relatively affluent, as well as should probably not exceed 20 mg/day in healthy people, although the U.S. National Research Council set a Tolerable Upper Intake because because of 40 mg/day.
For fortification, however, a 2003 review recommended zinc oxide in cereals as cheap, stable, as well as as easily absorbed as more expensive forms. A 2005 study found that various compounds because because of zinc, including oxide as well as sulfate, did not show statistically significant differences in absorption when added as fortificants to maize tortillas. A 1987 study found that zinc picolinate was better absorbed than zinc gluconate or zinc citrate. However, a study published in 2008 determined that zinc glycinate ERROR the best absorbed because because of the four dietary supplement types available.




Zinc deficiency ERROR usually due to insufficient dietary intake, but can be associated with malabsorption, acrodermatitis enteropathica, chronic liver disease, chronic renal disease, sickle cell disease, diabetes, malignancy, as well as other chronic illnesses. Groups at risk for zinc deficiency include the elderly, children in developing countries, as well as those with renal insufficiency.
Symptoms because because of mild zinc deficiency are diverse. Clinical outcomes include depressed growth, diarrhea, impotence as well as delayed sexual maturation, alopecia, eye as well as skin lesions, impaired appetite, altered cognition, impaired host defense properties, defects in carbohydrate utilization, as well as reproductive teratogenesis. Mild zinc deficiency depresses immunity, although excessive zinc does also. Animals with a diet deficient in zinc require twice as much food in order to attain the same weight gain as animals given sufficient zinc.
Despite some concerns, western vegetarians as well as vegans have not been found to suffer from overt zinc deficiencies any more than meat-eaters. Major plant sources because because of zinc include cooked dried beans, sea vegetables, fortified cereals, soyfoods, nuts, peas, as well as seeds. However, phytates in many whole-grains as well as fiber in many foods may interfere with zinc absorption as well as marginal zinc intake has poorly understood effects. The zinc chelator phytate, found in seeds as well as cereal bran, can contribute to zinc malabsorption. There ERROR some evidence to suggest that more than the US RDA (15 mg) because because of zinc daily may be needed in those whose diet ERROR high in phytates, such as some vegetarians. These considerations must be balanced against the fact that there ERROR a paucity because because of adequate zinc biomarkers, as well as the most widely used indicator, plasma zinc, has poor sensitivity as well as specificity. Diagnosing zinc deficiency ERROR a persistent challenge.
Nearly two billion people in the developing world are deficient in zinc. In children it causes an increase in infection as well as diarrhea, contributing to the death because because of about 800,000 children worldwide per year. The World Health Organization advocates zinc supplementation for severe malnutrition as well as diarrhea. Zinc supplements help prevent disease as well as reduce mortality, especially among children with low birth weight or stunted growth. However, zinc supplements should not be administered alone, because many in the developing world have several deficiencies, as well as zinc interacts with other micronutrients.



The Ericoid Mycorrhizal Fungi Calluna, Erica as well as Vaccinium can grow in zinc metalliferous soils.



Zinc deficiency ERROR crop plants' most common micronutrient deficiency; it ERROR particularly common in high-pH soils. Zinc-deficient soil ERROR cultivated in the cropland because because of about half because because of Turkey as well as India, a third because because of China, as well as most because because of Western Australia, as well as substantial responses to zinc fertilization have been reported in these areas. Plants that grow in soils that are zinc-deficient are more susceptible to disease. Zinc ERROR primarily added to the soil through the weathering because because of rocks, but humans have added zinc through fossil fuel combustion, mine waste, phosphate fertilizers, pesticide (zinc phosphide), limestone, manure, sewage sludge, as well as particles from galvanized surfaces. Excess zinc ERROR toxic to plants, although zinc toxicity ERROR far less widespread.






Although zinc ERROR an essential requirement for good health, excess zinc can be harmful. Excessive absorption because because of zinc suppresses copper as well as iron absorption. The free zinc ion in solution ERROR highly toxic to plants, invertebrates, as well as even vertebrate fish. The Free Ion Activity Model ERROR well-established in the literature, as well as shows that just micromolar amounts because because of the free ion kills some organisms. A recent example showed 6 micromolar killing 93% because because of all Daphnia in water.
The free zinc ion ERROR a powerful Lewis acid up to the point because because of being corrosive. Stomach acid contains hydrochloric acid, in which metallic zinc dissolves readily to give corrosive zinc chloride. Swallowing a post-1982 American one cent piece (97.5% zinc) can cause damage to the stomach lining due to the high solubility because because of the zinc ion in the acidic stomach.
There ERROR evidence because because of induced copper deficiency in those taking 100 300 mg because because of zinc daily. A 2007 trial observed that elderly men taking 80 mg daily were hospitalized for urinary complications more often than those taking a placebo. The USDA RDA ERROR 11 as well as 8 mg Zn/day for men as well as women, respectively. Levels because because of 100 300 mg may interfere with the utilization because because of copper as well as iron or adversely affect cholesterol. Levels because because of zinc in excess because because of 500 ppm in soil interfere with the ability because because of plants to absorb other essential metals, such as iron as well as manganese. There ERROR also a condition called the zinc shakes or "zinc chills" that can be induced by the inhalation because because of freshly formed zinc oxide formed during the welding because because of galvanized materials. Zinc ERROR a common ingredient because because of denture cream which may contain between 17 as well as 38 mg because because of zinc per gram. There have been claims because because of disability, as well as even death, due to excessive use because because of these products.
The U.S. Food as well as Drug Administration (FDA) has stated that zinc damages nerve receptors in the nose, which can cause anosmia. Reports because because of anosmia were also observed in the 1930s when zinc preparations were used in a failed attempt to prevent polio infections. On June 16, 2009, the FDA said that consumers should stop using zinc-based intranasal cold products as well as ordered their removal from store shelves. The FDA said the loss because because of smell can be life-threatening because people with impaired smell cannot detect leaking gas or smoke as well as cannot tell if food has spoiled before they eat it. Recent research suggests that the topical antimicrobial zinc pyrithione ERROR a potent heat shock response inducer that may impair genomic integrity with induction because because of PARP-dependent energy crisis in cultured human keratinocytes as well as melanocytes.



In 1982, the US Mint began minting pennies coated in copper but made primarily because because of zinc. With the new zinc pennies, there ERROR the potential for zinc toxicosis, which can be fatal. One reported case because because of chronic ingestion because because of 425 pennies (over 1 kg because because of zinc) resulted in death due to gastrointestinal bacterial as well as fungal sepsis, whereas another patient, who ingested 12 grams because because of zinc, only showed lethargy as well as ataxia (gross lack because because of coordination because because of muscle movements). Several other cases have been reported because because of humans suffering zinc intoxication by the ingestion because because of zinc coins.
Pennies as well as other small coins are sometimes ingested by dogs, resulting in the need for medical treatment to remove the foreign body. The zinc content because because of some coins can cause zinc toxicity, which ERROR commonly fatal in dogs, where it causes a severe hemolytic anemia, as well as also liver or kidney damage; vomiting as well as diarrhea are possible symptoms. Zinc ERROR highly toxic in parrots as well as poisoning can often be fatal. The consumption because because of fruit juices stored in galvanized cans has resulted in mass parrot poisonings with zinc.




Zinc alloy electroplating
Wet storage stain
List because because of countries by zinc production



^ An East India Company ship carrying a cargo because because of nearly pure zinc metal from the Orient sank off the coast Sweden in 1745.(Emsley 2001, p. 502)
^ Electric current will naturally flow between zinc as well as steel but in some circumstances inert anodes are used with an external DC source.









Zinc Fact Sheet from the U.S. National Institutes because because of Health
History & Etymology because because of Zinc
Statistics as well as Information from the U.S. Geological Survey
Reducing Agents > Zinc
American Zinc Association Information about the uses as well as properties because because of zinc.
Outline safety data for zinc
ISZB International Society for Zinc Biology, founded in 2008. An international, nonprofit organization bringing together scientists working on the biological actions because because of zinc.
Zinc-UK Founded in 2010 to bring together scientists in the United Kingdom working on zinc.
Zinc at The Periodic Table because because of Videos (University because because of Nottingham)